Post about processx and sigchld blocked (#68)
r-hub/blog: content/post/2020-02-07-processx-blocked-sigchld-fix/index.Rmd

---
slug: processx-blocked-sigchld
title: "Debugging: Signals and Subprocesses"
authors:
  - Gábor Csárdi
date: "2020-02-07"
tags:
- package development
- debugging
output: 
  html_document:
    keep_md: true
---

```{r include = FALSE}
options(width = 60)
```

This is a short story about a non-trivial bug in the processx package,

> and how I fixed it. It is a good showcase of the some debugging tools.

Reviewer: Since authors don't appear yet you should write your name after the first "I".

Author: Maybe we can wait until the names appear? :)

## The bug

[processx](https://processx.r-lib.org) is an R package to start and manage
external processes. It is used by the [callr](https://call.r-lib.org)
package to run code in another R session. The

> [original bug](https://github.com/r-lib/processx/issues/240) report has a

Reviewer: I'd name the issue opener and add a link to the GitHub profile.

nice, clean [reproducible example](https://reprex.tidyverse.org/):

> https://github.com/r-lib/processx/pull/237 seems to solve
> https://github.com/r-lib/processx/issues/236 for `processx`,
> but not for `callr`.
> 
> ```r
> fun <- function() {
>   parallel::mclapply(1:2, function(x) x)
> }
> env <- c(
>   callr::rcmd_safe_env(),
>   PROCESSX_NOTIFY_OLD_SIGCHLD = "true"
> )
> tmp <- callr::r(fun, env = env, show = TRUE)
> #> Error while shutting down parallel: unable to terminate some child processes
```

## A red herring

The references to [PR #237](https://github.com/r-lib/processx/pull/237) and
[issue #236](https://github.com/r-lib/processx/issues/236) are a red

> herring, and a tricky one! The error message is exactly the same there,

Reviewer: Add a link to https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_herring? I had to look up the definition 🙈

Author: I think we can just let people google. :)

Reviewer: I think it can make non native speakers feel inadequate

Author: OK, I'll link then.

but the reasons are very different. That issue is about an interference
between processx and the parallel package. This one must be something else,
because callr does not load processx (or any other R package) in the R
subprocess it creates:
```{r}
callr::r(function() loadedNamespaces())
```

## About `SIGCHLD` signals

To understand what is going on here, we need to know a bit about signals
and subprocesses. A signal is an asynchronous notification, sent to a
process by a(nother) process or the operating system. A signal means
that an important event has happened, and the process's normal execution
is interrupted. For some signal types, the process gets a chance to handle

> the signal gracefully and then continue execution. The `SIGCHLD` signal is

Reviewer: State that it is sig like signal and chld like child if that's the case? And are all signal names allcaps?

such a signal. It is sent by the operating system when a subprocess of
the (parent) process has finished its execution. When the parent process
receives `SIGCHLD`, the subprocess has already finished, but it is still
in the OS's process table. It is dead but still hanging around: it is a
[zombie process](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zombie_process).

To completely eliminate the subprocess, the parent process needs to either
read out its exit status, or tell the OS that it is not interested in the
exit status. The parent process can also pre-emptively tell the OS that
it is not interested in the exit status of its subprocesses, and in this
case no `SIGCHLD` signals are delivered to it at all.

> ## Of course it is my bad

Reviewer: 🤣

  show = TRUE
)
```

Still, it is possible (however unlikely :wink:) that the bug
is in the parallel package, e.g. because it does not set up the signal
handler for `SIGCHLD` properly, when the R session was started by
processx/callr.

The parallel package sets up a
[finalizer, that runs when R exits](https://github.com/wch/r-source/blob/50dca8f210058532ee0837fad69b1ae78dcac23e/src/library/parallel/R/zzz.R#L33).
This finalizer tries to eliminate all sub-processes that were started by
parallel, and if it fails to do that, it emits the error message that we
see above.

When eliminating sub-processes, parallel sends them a `SIGKILL` signal, which
is not possible to catch and handle, so it is sure that their execution
has finished, and they are in a zombie state. In fact, `mclapply()` already
tries to clean up the subprocesses it has started, so they are probably
already in the zombie state when `mclapply()` returns. This is
easy to check with the [ps](https://ps.r-lib.org/) package:

```{r, cache = TRUE}
tmp <- callr::r(
  function() {
    parallel::mclapply(1:2, function(x) x)
    print(sapply(ps::ps_children(ps::ps_handle()), ps::ps_status))
  },
  show = TRUE
)
```

> Indeed, both sub-processes of the callr R process are zombies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indeed, both subprocesses of the callr R process are zombies.
```

```
❯ lldb -w -n R
(lldb) process attach --name "R" --waitfor
```

Then in another terminal, we run `callr::r()`:
```r
callr::r(function() parallel::mclapply(1:2, function(x) x))
```

As soon as the callr subprocess starts, lldb will stop it (using a `SIGSTOP`
signal that cannot be caught):

```
❯ lldb -w -n R
(lldb) process attach --name "R" --waitfor
Process 4196 stopped
* thread #1, queue = 'com.apple.main-thread', stop reason = signal SIGSTOP
    frame #0: 0x00007fff74b75a4b libsystem_info.dylib`xdrmem_getlong_aligned + 75
libsystem_info.dylib`xdrmem_getlong_aligned:
->  0x7fff74b75a4b <+75>: callq  0x7fff74b759f0            ; _OSSwapInt32
    0x7fff74b75a50 <+80>: movq   -0x18(%rbp), %rdx
    0x7fff74b75a54 <+84>: movl   %eax, (%rdx)
    0x7fff74b75a56 <+86>: movq   -0x10(%rbp), %rdx
Target 0: (R) stopped.

Executable module set to "/Library/Frameworks/R.framework/Resources/bin/exec/R".
Architecture set to: x86_64h-apple-macosx-.
(lldb)
```

Now we can set break points on
[parallel C functions](https://github.com/wch/r-source/blob/50dca8f210058532ee0837fad69b1ae78dcac23e/src/library/parallel/src/fork.c).

> For a better debugging experience, it makes sense to recompile R without

Reviewer: Would a link to https://github.com/wch/r-debug/blob/master/debugging-r.md make sense?

Author: I'll add some link at the end of the post.

Now we tell lldb to stop on receiving a `SIGCHLD` signal:

```
(lldb) process handle SIGCHLD --notify true --pass true --stop true                                                NAME         PASS   STOP   NOTIFY
===========  =====  =====  ======
SIGCHLD      true   true   true
```

and we are ready to continue the process. It will stop again at `mc_fork()`,
because we are starting two subprocesses in `mclapply()`. Then we continue
again:

```
(lldb) c
Process 4196 resuming
Process 4196 stopped
* thread #1, queue = 'com.apple.main-thread', stop reason = breakpoint 1.1
    frame #0: 0x000000010e89ea10 parallel.so`mc_fork
parallel.so`mc_fork:
->  0x10e89ea10 <+0>: pushq  %rbp
    0x10e89ea11 <+1>: movq   %rsp, %rbp
    0x10e89ea14 <+4>: pushq  %r15
    0x10e89ea16 <+6>: pushq  %r14
Target 0: (R) stopped.
(lldb) c
Process 4196 resuming
Process 4196 stopped
* thread #1, queue = 'com.apple.main-thread', stop reason = breakpoint 2.1
    frame #0: 0x000000010e89e680 parallel.so`mc_cleanup
parallel.so`mc_cleanup:
->  0x10e89e680 <+0>: pushq  %rbp
    0x10e89e681 <+1>: movq   %rsp, %rbp
    0x10e89e684 <+4>: pushq  %r15
    0x10e89e686 <+6>: pushq  %r14
Target 0: (R) stopped.
(lldb)
```

> Interestingly, we got to `mc_cleanup`, even tough the `SIGCHLD` signal(s)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interestingly, we got to `mc_cleanup`, even though the `SIGCHLD` signal(s)
```

should have arrived first. From another R session, we can check that the
subprocesses of parallel are zombies already:

```
❯ sapply(ps::ps_children(ps::ps_handle(4196L)), ps::ps_status)
[1] "zombie" "zombie"
```

We can continue still, and hope that the `SIGCHLD`s will still arrive,
but they won't:

```
(lldb) c
Process 4196 resuming
Process 4196 stopped
* thread #1, queue = 'com.apple.main-thread', stop reason = breakpoint 2.1
    frame #0: 0x000000010e89e680 parallel.so`mc_cleanup
parallel.so`mc_cleanup:
->  0x10e89e680 <+0>: pushq  %rbp
    0x10e89e681 <+1>: movq   %rsp, %rbp
    0x10e89e684 <+4>: pushq  %r15
    0x10e89e686 <+6>: pushq  %r14
Target 0: (R) stopped.
(lldb) c
Process 4196 resuming
Process 4196 exited with status = 0 (0x00000000)
(lldb)
```

Clearly, the signal handler is properly set up in parallel, but the

> signals are not delivered to the process.

Reviewer: Explicitly remind the title of the section i.e. that at this point you knew the mistake was in your code?

[processx](https://processx.r-lib.org) is an R package to start and manage
external processes. It is used by the [callr](https://call.r-lib.org)
package to run code in another R session. The
[original bug](https://github.com/r-lib/processx/issues/240) report

> by [@wlandau](https://github.com/wlandau) has a nice, clean

Reviewer: Will Landau not wlandau 🙂
